NXDOC-2132: update comments documentation with tree implementation (#1486)
nuxeo/doc.nuxeo.com-content: src/nxdoc/nuxeo-server/platform-services/comments.md

## Core Implementation

### Current implementation - TreeCommentManager

> 

Reviewer: I am wondering if we should specify `TreeCommentManager`, I mean perhaps give more context and explain that a comment is stored under the commented document which represents the Tree Storage structure.

Author: Is this what you mean ? Or do you think more should be said ?
https://github.com/nuxeo/doc.nuxeo.com-content/pull/1486/commits/99aa2e90c8e3562dd6b87e2d8be023d2d87e3a5c#diff-d0ac791dfc7f98240e792b1fc40a612eR52-R57

Reviewer: My idea is here:
- Should we specify the `TreeCommentManager` and if it is the case, I think we should link to the class.
- If we specify it, it means we have others implementation which are not explained here. what if we say `Comment Are stored as a Tree Structure`. 

Which is some confusing for me is we talk at the beginning of the implementation and the details of it is done later (99aa2e9#diff-d0ac791dfc7f98240e792b1fc40a612eR52-R57)

Author: about the bullet points:
I wish I could link the classes but http://community.nuxeo.com/api/nuxeo/latest/javadoc/ doesn't have the `TreeCommentManager` actually. It only has the `PropertyCommentManager`. It's due to the fact the `TreeCommentManager` is only available in HF and Master. So I end up with just the name.

I specified Tree and Property to explicit the fact we are not talking about Property and Relation. I think it's more relevant than "current" and "legacy" ?

About the explanations concerning the implementation, they come in the same position as for the previous implementation (I adapted the existing doc) but if you have a better order in mind, I'm open to it !

Comments hold:

- parent id (legacy purpose)
- ancestor ids (legacy purpose)
- author
- text
- creation date
- modification date

[`Comment`](http://community.nuxeo.com/api/nuxeo/latest/javadoc/org/nuxeo/ecm/platform/comment/api/Comment.html) interface has been created to handle comments in Nuxeo. The interface is used as based type in [comment service](#java-api) and also defines how comments are serialized in JSON in order to use them with the [REST API](#json-entity-format).

Annotations are stored as regular document of type `Annotation` which inherit from `Comment`. They hold in addition of comments:

- blob xpath

Like comments, annotations have the [`Annotation`](http://community.nuxeo.com/api/nuxeo/latest/javadoc/org/nuxeo/ecm/platform/comment/api/Annotation.html) interface to use them.

Comments and annotations can have the facet `ExternalEntity`. When they have this facet, it can hold in addition:

- external entity id
- external entity
- external entity origin</br>
With this facet, it is possible to handle external content such as annotations made in [ARender]({{page space='nxdoc' page='nuxeo-arender-connector'}}) for instance.

> 

Reviewer: I am wondering if we refactor the part of the common things (between the tree and property), I mean we have the same definition on type: `Comment` and `Annotation` we provide the same properties (main difference is for the Tree, parentId and ancestor are kept for backward compatibility). to accomplish it one of idea is to give definition and common part at beginning and add an implementation section

Comments and annotations are stored as a tree structure in a folderish document of type `CommentRoot` which is located right under the commented document. Comments are _special children_ which means they are not copied with the commented document during copy operations but they are snapshot when the document is checked in.</br>

> Please note comments are not restored when a version of the commented document is checked out.

Reviewer: I think we can add more explanation as each comment is stored under the commented document (which it means in the case of reply it will be under the comment). as reminder the Tree API comment allows the tree structure but the web-ui will send always the first comment as a parent which means even we allows the tree we can store them as a flat under the first comment (like Slack, Kevin discussion :) )

Author: I can add the following *beautifull* ascii schema
doc
|_CommentRoot
    |_comment
        |_reply

Reviewer: looks good to me too the schema. my main wondering is we propos this structure but it's not used in web-ui which is the main client for this API. let wait for the team review ;)

#### Permissions

> Comments and annotations rely on the the `ACL` security model present in Nuxeo. People who have access to a commented document have read access to its comments and can edit their own comments and annotations.

Reviewer: We can add the link to `ACL`.  We have also the case of Administrator which is super user even on comments. I don't if we should mention it or not.

#### Events

All events share the same event context. It contains:

- the parent document in `parentComment` which may be a comment or the commented document
- the comment in `comment_document`
- the comment text in `comment`
- the category `commentCategory` in `category`

A `commentAdded` event is fired when creating a comment or annotation.

> 

Reviewer: We have also the `commentUpdate`

Reviewer: Perhaps we can remove the redundancy on `event is` as we are in the `Events` section

Author: About updated to be exact we end up calling: https://github.com/nuxeo/nuxeo/blob/2387c0ba417810c3b68fd8d51795b46cdee6f579/modules/platform/nuxeo-platform-notification/nuxeo-platform-notification-core/src/main/java/org/nuxeo/ecm/platform/ec/notification/SubscriptionAdapter.java#L165

And it ends up firing every event registered here:
https://github.com/nuxeo/nuxeo/blob/2387c0ba417810c3b68fd8d51795b46cdee6f579/modules/platform/nuxeo-platform-comment/nuxeo-platform-comment/src/main/resources/OSGI-INF/comment-notification-contrib.xml#L11-L27

So we could even give a contrib example about how to contribute to those fired events. wdyt ?

"A `commentAdded` is fired" would feel weirder to me

Reviewer: >"A commentAdded is fired" would feel weirder to me

Reviewer: >"A commentAdded is fired" would feel weirder to me

Yep, looks good to me too 

>So we could even give a contrib example about how to contribute to those fired events. wdyt ?

Yep, why not. my main idea is give the information that update is also fired to avoid any interrogation from the reader

A `commentRemoved` event is fired when deleting a comment or annotation.

#### Autosubscription

When a first comment is added to a document, the document author is subscribed automatically to the `commentAdded` event on the document.</br>
When a user adds his first comment on a document. He is subscribed automatically to the `commentAdded` event on the document.</br>

> Autosubscription is turned on by default. It can be turned off by contributing like so:

Reviewer: If I recall correctly we are notified even when a comment is updated see [here](https://github.com/nuxeo/nuxeo/blob/master/modules/platform/nuxeo-platform-comment/nuxeo-platform-comment/src/test/java/org/nuxeo/ecm/platform/comment/TestTreeCommentNotification.java#L83).

Author: proposed something here https://github.com/nuxeo/doc.nuxeo.com-content/pull/1486#discussion_r439075386

[`Comment`](http://community.nuxeo.com/api/nuxeo/latest/javadoc/org/nuxeo/ecm/platform/comment/api/Comment.html) interface has been created to handle comments in Nuxeo. The interface is used as based type in [comment service](#java-api) and also defines how comments are serialized in JSON in order to use them with the [REST API](#json-entity-format).

Annotations are stored as regular document of type `Annotation` which inherit from `Comment`. They hold in addition of comments:

- blob xpath

Like comments, annotations have the [`Annotation`](http://community.nuxeo.com/api/nuxeo/latest/javadoc/org/nuxeo/ecm/platform/comment/api/Annotation.html) interface to use them.

Comments and annotations can have the facet `ExternalEntity`. When they have this facet, it can hold in addition:

- external entity id
- external entity
- external entity origin</br>

> With this facet, it is possible to handle external content such as annotations made in [ARender]({{page space='nxdoc' page='nuxeo-arender-connector'}}) for instance.

Author: After this I have had an issue with the local server to check the result. It happens you need to suffix the base url with `next` like so: ```http://localhost:3000/nxdoc/next```

Tried the link there to make sure nothing was broken but the link loops back to the Comments page while http://localhost:3000/nxdoc/next/nuxeo-enhanced-viewer` does actually exist.

Anyway I reverted everything back in place.

Please note comments are not restored when a version of the commented document is checked out.

#### Permissions

Comments and annotations rely on the the [`ACL`](https://community.nuxeo.com/api/nuxeo/latest/javadoc/org/nuxeo/ecm/core/api/security/ACL.html) security model present in Nuxeo. People who have access to a commented document have read access to its comments and can edit their own comments and annotations.

#### Events

All events share the same event context. It contains:

- the parent document in `parentComment` which may be a comment or the commented document
- the comment in `comment_document`
- the comment text in `comment`
- the category `commentCategory` in `category`

A `commentAdded` event is fired when creating a comment or annotation.

A `commentUpdated` event is fired when updating a comment or annotation.

A `commentRemoved` event is fired when deleting a comment or annotation.

#### Autosubscription

> When a first comment is added to a document, the document author is subscribed automatically to the `commentAdded` event on the document.</br>

Reviewer 2: No need to use `</br>` in such case in Markdown, just add a new line.

Author: If I add a single new line it's ignored. If I add 2, I end up with a new paragraph. So I escaped the linebreaks with `\`

> When a user adds his first comment on a document. He is subscribed automatically to the `commentAdded` event on the document.</br>

Reviewer 2: I thought the paragraph is a bit complex. Something like _author is automatically subscribed to the notifications of its comment_ sounds a bit less complex.

Furthermore, the second part is composed of two sentences which are linked (one can't be understand without the other), can you reword it?

Author: I propose this:
>Author is subscribed automatically to the `commentAdded` event on his documents.\
Comment Author is subscribed automatically to the `commentAdded` event on the commented document.\

Autosubscription is turned on by default. It can be turned off by contributing like so:

```xml
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<component name="org.nuxeo.ecm.platform.comment.service.notification.custom">
  <extension target="org.nuxeo.runtime.ConfigurationService" point="configuration">
    <property name="org.nuxeo.ecm.platform.comment.service.notification.autosubscribe">false<property>
  </extension>

> </component>

Reviewer 2: You may need to add a require on `org.nuxeo.ecm.platform.comment.service.notification` in the XML.

```

> ### Legacy implementation - PropertyCommentManager

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure we want to keep the legacy implementation on the master branch.

It is interesting to keep it on 10.10 as it is the default implementation and we also need to state about the needed migration for security purposes (on 10.10).

Author: I removed it, I'll put it on 10.10

[`Comment`](http://community.nuxeo.com/api/nuxeo/latest/javadoc/org/nuxeo/ecm/platform/comment/api/Comment.html) interface has been created to handle comments in Nuxeo. The interface is used as based type in [comment service](#java-api) and also defines how comments are serialized in JSON in order to use them with the [REST API](#json-entity-format).

Annotations are stored as regular document of type `Annotation` which inherit from `Comment`. They hold in addition of comments:

- blob xpath

Like comments, annotations have the [`Annotation`](http://community.nuxeo.com/api/nuxeo/latest/javadoc/org/nuxeo/ecm/platform/comment/api/Annotation.html) interface to use them.

Comments and annotations can have the facet `ExternalEntity`. When they have this facet, it can hold in addition:

- external entity id
- external entity
- external entity origin</br>

> With this facet, it is possible to handle external content such as annotations made in [Nuxeo Enhanced Viewer]({{page space='nxdoc' page='nuxeo-arender-connector'}}) for instance.

Reviewer 2: Remaining arender, does this page exist?

### Storage

Comments and annotations are stored as a tree structure in a folderish document of type `CommentRoot` which is located right under the commented document. Comments are _special children_ which means they are not copied with the commented document during copy operations but they are snapshot when the document is checked in.</br>
Please note comments are not restored when a version of the commented document is checked out.

### Permissions

> Comments and annotations rely on the the [`ACL`](https://community.nuxeo.com/api/nuxeo/latest/javadoc/org/nuxeo/ecm/core/api/security/ACL.html) security model present in Nuxeo. ACLs are automatically inherited by default in `Nuxeo`. So for example if a user has read access to a document, he also has read access to its children. By consequence, people who have access to a commented document have read access to its comments and people who write comments and annotation, can edit them as they have write access on them.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Comments and annotations rely on the the [`ACL`](https://community.nuxeo.com/api/nuxeo/latest/javadoc/org/nuxeo/ecm/core/api/security/ACL.html) security model present in Nuxeo. ACLs are automatically inherited by default in `Nuxeo`. So for example if a user has read access to a document, he also has read access to its children. By consequence, people who have access to a commented document have read access to its comments and people who create comments and annotation, can edit them as they have write access on them.
```

### Events

All events share the same event context. It contains:

- the parent document in `parentComment` which may be a comment or the commented document
- the comment in `comment_document`
- the comment text in `comment`
- the category `commentCategory` in `category`

A `commentAdded` event is fired when creating a comment or annotation.

A `commentUpdated` event is fired when updating a comment or annotation.

A `commentRemoved` event is fired when deleting a comment or annotation.

### Autosubscription

> Author is subscribed automatically to the `commentAdded` event on his documents.\

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Document creator is subscribed automatically to the `commentAdded` event on his documents.\
```
